Interview
with Mr. B.A. Anderson, side three. I had
difficulty in finding previous correspondence.
And it seems that all the correspondence was
placed in a folder or folders, placed in the box and
put up on the closet. A year later, you didn't know
what box contained what. You didn't know where to
look for anything. So I realized that we needed to
come to some standardization of material by the
various departments then, I mean the police
department and all the rest of them, and that file
designations would be appropriate so that, like
you explained, if you wanted something, you know,
a week or a month or five years from now, if you're
looking for personnel or personnel matters, it
would be in a personnel file, not a file with
mechanics or, you know, any other function of the
city. So I proposed this scheme
But it met with a lot of resentment on the part of the
city. You know, people don't like to change. And
they were doing things one way, and they just
didn't like it. I also proposed at the same time the
establishment of a library with a certain code. I
don't know whether you found it. I think that's
what I found, the code. Well, I had two. Oh, okay. I
had the library, you know, with the stuff that we
wanted to file, plus the correspondence. Okay. So
maybe I didn't see... Well, there were two. And the
library books were one thing, and then the... I
forgot what...
The library, I think I used the code of the... I
don't know now. I think it was a regular library
code, a Dewey Decimal adapted from something or
other. I know I spent a lot of time working that up
and working the file system, because I wanted it
for the file system particularly. Because police
matters shouldn't be put in a folder with
administrative matters and then The Parks
Committee would be thrown in here and then put in a
box. You couldn't find anything. So that's when,
really, I started to save my own files. Because if
anything was important in order to protect
myself, I had an extra copy made and put it in my
file. I can tell you about the 911 telephone that I
had worked up. And that's another thing that I'm
feather in my cap in a sense. I'm glad to see that
materialize. But that, I forgot the year that was
started and why. Maybe that's when we started to
have these problems. I don't know the year. Right.
But that was. But see when When the soup came along
and all this, everything just died down. And
everybody lost those on the council. They just
lost interest. They didn't have the interest that
they did before. Because you can't go gung-ho with
that hanging over your head. That's right. feel
that the city has gotten to a point where they
really need to organize their records. And this is
probably one area that they will work on in the
future. And it's just a shame that it couldn't have
been maintained. Well, this is the thing that I
asked a little while ago about the needs. I could
see that need. And I could see these needs in the
cemetery and this and this. Because every time I
looked around, I could see things that had to be
done. That's why I threw together that five-year
plan myself and just sent it out to 100 people. I
know there was 100. And I had them critique it and
what's wrong with it. Am I on the wrong track? What
else do you want? What else do you think? To get
their reaction. And I did it. I got
it. But I'm sorry that never went through. But I
still think it's a good idea. I do, too. Also, we had
valuable books there, publications in the
library that you didn't know where they were. At
that time, we had the library in that back room.
They were just thrown together and stacked up, and
if you wanted to go in and look for something
special, they were just there. Well, I couldn't
tell you where they are now. I haven't ever seen one
place where they have a lot of books.
Were you also the first administration to work on a
personnel manual? Right. Did you decide that the
city needed it? That was one of my babies. Did you
decide the city needed it? I almost wrote all of
that myself. Or not wrote, I got it from, garnished
it from other cities and everything else. And we
were beginning to grow up. There was different
regulations that abounded annual leave and sick
leave and some were leaving personnel off and
there were problems. Well, I understand that Joe
got two days or four days for Christmas and how come
I only got one? You know, the city employees also
came to him with all kinds of problems. So that I
knew, you know, I knew the workings pretty well in
the city. because they felt that they could come to
me and talk to me. Of course, I respected their
opinion, but I wouldn't make any, you know, if they
were wrong, they were wrong. And, of course, I'd
speak to the department and follow them, but at
least I got their side of the story. So until that
point, the city employees never really, I don't
know, organized? We never had many regulations.
And what I was trying to do, I know it wasn't the
best, But what can I, you know what I mean? I was
working, too, with the university. Right, that's
right. And I was given every available second to
the city. And I wrote most of that. You know what I
mean, or pulled it together. Right. Of course, I
received a lot of criticism. Why? And I received it
later, but... I didn't see
them do
anything for the other cities had one if
you wanted to know what's the vacation schedule
for the year the council You know, doing that. Is it
something that the council normally does? Well,
they set policies so that they'd say you get two
days for Christmas or one for Thanksgiving or you
get Fourth of July off or, you know, whatever it is.
So they have to approve it? Yeah, they approve it by
policy. They just say this is a holiday schedule
for the city. A city manager... And then, well, he
has to abide by the policy. Well, can he, or does it
work where he formulates it in the city? Well, he
could, yeah. In the city, okay. Well, you know, in a
way, then, Rand Boswell was a little weak as the
city manager. Well, I was going to ask you that. I
don't mean to, I don't want this into any of the
records. Okay. But Rand was a little weak, and...
He didn't have much training in that. He was
manager of a bottling company before he came. He
served as a clerk. And there's a lot more that's
left unsaid. But because of his weakness, I had to
assume. I overstepped myself in my role as mayor
because I wanted to get things done. I couldn't
sit. I wanted to move. I wanted our city to move. So
you'll see that I kept implementing things all the
time with things that normally should have come
from him as a recommendation. Well, was Langford
then also a strong administrator, too? Was that
something that Mr. Boswell would do, too? Well,
see, they didn't have the things going as they did
later on. You know, the city didn't have that much
to do. We weren't growing that fast. But more
things were coming up every day. You know what I
mean? We were
trying to get the city, you know, in many ways,
going.
And Rand was just not up to it. I mean, he just
didn't... I respected him. I thought a lot of him
personally, but he wasn't a good administrator.
I know that I overstepped my bounds, but I just had
to do it. Things had to go. I was ready to go. I wasn't
ready to sit. I think my record substantially, I
mean this weekly letter to the council on a
Saturday tour of the whole city to answer any
complaint from anybody on Sunday if necessary.
You know what I mean, it was my city.
Since I didn't have the opportunity to talk to Mr.
Langford, I can only get from the records. And he
was mayor for quite a bit of time, but yet the city
wasn't as big and things were not going on. Well,
they didn't have a problem. And I think the minutes
will reflect that. That's right. Because, you
know, I was on the council with him. Well, they
were, I think maybe the most critical one was the
page bill for the roads. That came up before Joe
Wood, and that was during his tenure at that point.
You know, this is out of sequence, but I meant to ask
you, do you know why Mr. Langford decided to
resign? I mean, he had... I've been the mayor for
many years, but... I think he just got to the point
where he was getting pretty old. Right. He'd been
retired from the university for at least 10 years.
And I thought, I think he was getting to the point
where he just wanted to step down. He just wanted to
live up to it. He enjoyed the honor because when he
went to, like, league meetings, you know, he was
always respected as the dean and players, you
know, for his team. And he enjoyed that. He enjoyed
getting that. But in his latter years, you know, he
wasn't as active as he could be. Okay.
We had been talking about the five-year plan. This
and the Browns' plan seemed to me to be what you had
termed a forerunner to a comprehensive city plan.
And this happened after, this took effect after
you were resigned, but the comprehensive, the 701
plan, do you know what I'm talking about? Yeah,
that came after. Was it something that you worked
on at all? No, that... I think that came after, and
it was just really a follow-up, you know, stuff we
were doing right along. But most of the work on that
701 was done by others. I want no credit for that.
And yet a lot of things in your plans, your
five-year plans, were incorporated. Oh, yeah.
And are even incorporated in the 22,000. Yeah.
Well, that was really my own ideas, too, you know,
that I just, you know, as you keep around in this
field and that field and what they
should be doing. But Mr. Langford never really had
a point in talking about music? We've also talked
about this earlier, too, but I found this very
interesting, that during your administration,
that College Station used federal funds for the
first time, or applied for them. And were you
behind the effort? Oh, yeah. I was with Langford
during his term. We were all conservative, like I
said earlier. But then it soon became obvious to
me, as well as to others, that all the communities
surrounding us College Station, Brine, and, you
know, Hearn, and all the rest of them were getting
funds, and we're just sitting here, and we're
paying money out, and we're not getting anything
in. And even though we didn't like it, we might as
well start getting a little bit in return, because
we needed a sewer disposal plant, and if we could
get 40%, why, it's too hard for us to do. So if I
remember, the sewer disposal plant was the first
one
that we, you know, it was the first federal project
that we engaged in. Was that the EDA doing it? Yeah,
yeah. Were you able to complete that, the sewer
system? Yeah, yeah. And the reason why I ask...
Well, that's something else. We found a baby down
there one day. Somebody came down through the
fire. Oh
my gosh, you're kidding me. We don't
know. It was
examined by a doctor. I don't know how long it was in
the water and so on. Probably some woman just got
rid of it. And no one ever reported it? Oh yeah, it
was reported. I've seen some funny things, you
know, sitting over there. Well, was that
mentioned in the paper? They
kept that out? That's what I thought. Oh my gosh.
That's just like building that water tower right
down here. I only wish they'd called me at that day.
They were going down with a lake at one of the
towers, the tower at Watertown. And that big...
drill that they were using i don't know how many
feet down pretty deep well it dropped after we got
down a certain distance and what happened it hit a
pocket of sphagnum moss and everything else down
there so they pulled it up well they found out the
depth of that hole then pulled it up and of course
sphagnum moss came up well i would have loved to
some of that moss and look at it under the
microscope just to see what trees, what pollen,
you know, everything about that particular moss.
But I didn't hear about it until the next day. What
they did, once they hit it, then under the contract
they had to get out, I think, ten more feet. And so
they started to go beyond that hole. But it's
surprising to think that there's a big old not a
limestone cavern, but a cavern out there that had,
you know, just full of moss. You know, spaghid
moss. But I, the next day it was all dry and, you
know, covered up. What does that mean when you say
spaghid? Well, that means that in years past, or
centuries past, during the upheaval, you know,
the gulf, there used to be inland water. that
somehow or other this got in there, and I don't
know. But we could have looked at it through a
microscope. We might have been able to tell what
plants were there, see? What plants had been
living at one time. Right, in that hole. In that
hole. Well, that's just a little... You know, one
of these things. I get curious about things like
that. Oh, sure. That's what makes life so
interesting. Yeah. Okay, I was a little bit
confused. You had a bond election for water, and
did you use that in connection with the EDA grant to
build the sewer system and the water lines? Well,
we had a sewer grant and a water grant. Oh, you had
two separate ones. And we extended our water line
and then improved our sewer disposal system.
Actually, we enlarged the sewer
disposal plant down there and put in a next room.
Yeah, where that bed, where that, I forget the name
of it, where it comes up, the water comes up, and the
animal life lives down there. We put in another
one of them. And we improved the sewer lines in many
parts of the city. So we went ahead with these two
things. Okay. After you left office, there was a
grant, and it had to do with water and sewage, that
was the government canceled on. For some reason, I
don't know. Do you recall what I'm talking about?
No. I don't know if it's in connection with this.
Sometimes it's hard to keep up with all the...
Well, when I went out, I was just depressed. For
good reasons. For many reasons, because, you
know, I missed... I lived in my city, and then, you
know, to get out like I had to. As you know, I went
four months without a check. Oh, well, I didn't
realize it. I realized that you stayed on longer
than me. And the wife finally told me
one day, she said, I'm glad we went down long enough
on principle. And so I just had to get out. Yeah. I'm
glad
I did. Of course, you were acquainted with the
amendment that I worked on. Oh, yes, yes. 12 or 13. I
can't remember the 12. 12, I thought. Well,
everybody told me that I'd never succeed there,
too. I said, who are you to get an amendment passed,
a constitutional amendment? In Texas, people
just, you know, turn them down and pass them. And in
the first place, you'll never get us through the
legislature. So I took that as a challenge. Now, a
lot of this is not written down either, but I formed
a committee and, oh, what's his name, was it Brian
Eagle? He agreed to help me. Oh, I formed a
committee of about 12 people. I did most of the
work, though. I don't think there's a university
or college that I didn't like personally. I must
have spent close to maybe $1,000 of my own money
getting a message out to student groups,
organized labor, the blacks, Anybody that I
figured had anything to do. A lot of people,
people's positions were at stake. Not only those
that worked for the university, but they took the
county agents that worked for irrigation
districts. In East Texas, they were on little
boards way out in the rural areas of the state that
were knocked out. They couldn't serve. They were
the most knowledgeable people all throughout the
state. and I enlisted their support and well I knew
enough about the legislature because I had served
on the Texas Municipal League and various state
committees and then before the legislature and I
knew Ben Barnes and I knew Gus Mutcher and they've
been just kicked out here you know but at that time I
knew them all and I knew the procedures And I knew
who my friend mayors would be. So we got the ball
going. I did get it through the legislature. Was
that hard? Did you have any trouble? Well, you had
to know what to do and how to do it. You know, who to
see and what committees to go to. It wasn't hard,
but yet it wasn't easy. You know. So we got it
through the legislature.
And I don't know that you know anything about
legislating. Oh, do I know anything? Oh, it's,
well, at any rate, I got it through the
legislature. And it was put up for constitutional
ballot. Then they told me . That's really when I
accepted another challenge. And I was determined
again. I might be down in defeat, but then I'm going
after him, and which I did. And I sent out thousands
of letters, and the Brine Eagle, this fellow from
the Eagle, I forget his name now, he went from here
to California. And that brings up, well, that's a
notice point, but the Brine Eagle. But at any rate,
this, he ran off something. one-page, full-page
eagle on both sides about this whole program. And
he provided me with all the copies I could use. And I
made one little appeal for money. And I guess I took
in about $150. That's all. Even I was surprised
some people around here wouldn't donate one cent.
But then I didn't bother. I was after something
else. There was a principal in there. And so I
started sending out these flyers. And I don't
think I missed a student college, student body,
you know, a union. I got that Texas Almanac out, and
I mean, boy, I just, between this and my wife and
another girl, I mean, boy, we sent letters out to
everybody. And when it came up for a vote, it just
passed. Now, it wasn't a high vote for it, but it
passed. And then we won. And all of this now is over
in the archives. They were quite interested in it
and wanted to be sure that they got it over. Yes,
sir. I looked at that. No, I still have some stuff in
here. to put in there when I, you know, someday in
the future, when I get ready. When sufficient time
has passed. Yeah. I still got some stuff in my own
pile. And I got some other succulent stuff, too.
I'll hold that for
now. OK. We were talking about federal funds, and
you mentioned the water and sewer funds. Also, the
HUD fund, is that right, that helped with
providing housing for the, I guess, the lower
class? Yeah, yeah. Well, at that, well, now the
Catholic Church, you know, came in, but all I did
was just support it. It was their project. Oh. I
don't understand that.
Oh, not housing development. It was something
like Southgate, then? Yeah. Southville? Yeah,
something like that. That went in, and there was
some objection there at the time. And as far as I was
concerned, I got with the bishop in Austin. You
know what I mean. Again, I've tried to become
knowledgeable on the subject one way or another.
And
I was convinced
that it would serve
a good purpose to have it, at least having looked
over what they had done over in Austin, too. So I
supported it. There was some objection there, and
they finally went through with it. The one in Grime
has not been a success at all. I mean, they've had
fights and murders and, you know, all kinds of
problems in the Grime area. Ours is still in
effect? Well, it was under the sponsorship of the
Catholic Monastic
Sync in Austin. I don't know. I think we had some
place in the past where
they sold that one. I'm not sure. They've had more.
These two were built about the same time. Was it
using HEV? Yeah, I think it was. And is it a
subsidized rent? Is that what it
is? Yeah. Yeah. OK. Also, in the area of
transportation, I think you hinted at this
before, but the city applied for federal funds
through the topics plan. Is that right? Yeah. But I
don't think we ever got anything.
I didn't meet another one. Was that for
signalization? Yeah. Oh, okay. Yeah. That was
pretty, now the highway department was handling
that.
I know they had to approve everything. Yeah, they
were the ones that were allocated the money, as I
recall, to dish out. I'm not sure, maybe we did, but
I'm not sure. I'm not sure. Well, as I was reading
the minutes, I may have extended past your term as
mayor, and they signalized the lights maybe right
after you resigned, is that? Maybe, could be. Or
maybe, I just forget. Well, I do remember there
was... in the minutes and talked about Joe Hanna
coming on, if he could. Yeah, he was District
Engineer, yeah. And at first, College Station
turned down funds to have their lights signaled
because they were upset that, I think, like, only
one light or two lights were going to be
signalized, whereas in Bryan, they had a whole
school of lights. Yeah. They didn't think it was
proportionately fair. And then Mr. Hanover came
to talk to them, and I believe they had the signal.
Yeah. I forgot. All right. Thank you. Maybe so. You
know, some of these things are a little hazy now.
All right. Also, another one that, another
project that I found real interesting is the
Rubber Street project. Do you remember? Oh, yeah,
that rubber and glass? Mm-hmm. Yeah. Well, you
know, that was just some other innovative thing,
and that was, I forget his name, that ground-up
rubber, and... We had a few streets, well, they're
still messed up.
From an engineering standpoint, they weren't put
in properly. And the minutes will reflect, I
think, where I objected to it at the time. This was
when we had that pay as you go. And this developer
wanted to put in concrete streets. That's way
back. And he wanted to put it on clay without
reinforcing.
And if you'll notice, I objected to this procedure
because I didn't think that the concrete would
hold together on clay and bounce around. Yeah,
it's fine. And I was assured by some engineer that
you don't know what you're talking about. You're
not an engineer, highway engineer, and you don't
know anything about concrete. And at any rate,
White, it was agreed that he could go ahead and put
five inches of concrete on top of Clay. Well, the
end result is as you see it back there. Do you ever
drive in that? What street? Oh, Westover and all
that area down there. And there were huge cracks
and everything else. Well, this seemed then,
there was one street, this seemed like a good
opportunity to take one of these streets and try
this rubber and glass. I think it was glass, too,
wasn't it? Or was it just rubber? I don't know.
Well, sometimes it was a, let's put it in the name of
a stretch. It was a mixture of ground and tires.
Yeah. So we, and then this fellow from the
university, and he was, his reputation was on the
line, and you know, PhD, and he seemed to know, you
know, had highway experience. It was with TTI. so
we agreed to go ahead and let's try this stuff out so
we tried it and we didn't have two months or he
didn't have two months success in laying he had
some problems with the machine but uh be that as it
may why we finally put it on a screen or two up there
And it never really, it never really found out. It
didn't? No, no. Were you using federal funds to?
Yeah, I think we did have, he had, yeah. It was his
project primarily. But you allowed him to go ahead
and use. Oh yeah, yeah. But the project paper
really didn't work out. No. It sounded like such a
good idea. Yeah, well it did to us too, you know, and
you're grabbing at straws because You had an area
like that. The only other alternative was to tear
up the whole street and redo it. Now, instead of
putting that concrete on clay, if they had come
along and put gravel or sand to cushion it, see, and
let it move, and let it move back and forth and up and
down, they didn't do it. And I think you find in the
minutes where I did object, I always said that.
They told me I didn't have any sense and I didn't
know what I was talking about. You didn't have the
background to answer that question. Yeah, so that
was an interesting little project. In the area of
recreation, as I understand it, you were very
active in obtaining undeveloped land for parks.
Well, I was trying to, yeah. I started this matter
while I was mayor where we had that ordinance that
provided that a certain piece of that land had to
go, or its equivalent in money, had to go for parks.
From developers? Yeah. And I remember that
ordinance specifically and worked hard for its
adoption. At the time, I recall, we said it was
unconstitutional and this, that, and the other,
but other cities were playing it. So we passed
it. And I think it was very fortunate because it
enabled us at least to get little pieces of land to
get the park system started. And that five year
plan, didn't I have a large park of 100 acres? I
forgot now what it was. I don't know what one thing,
too, that isn't in the record, I don't think, is
this. A&M used to get franchise tax from telephone
use. And let's see, was it Dick Gilchrist as
chancellor? I was
always
trying to get money from every possible source.
The university was picking up, as I recall, about
$4,000 or $5,000 a year out of a telephone
franchise tax. That, in other cities, was going to
the city. So I communicated with all cities in
Texas
that had a university in connection with it and
determined that the franchise tax was going to the
city, not the university. So I approached the
university and they fought me on that, the
university did. But we always had an
understanding there. After it was all over, we
won. Oh, you got franchised? Yeah. I really got a
GTE and a buying because they knew Rudder and they
were personal friends, you know, the president.
And he didn't want anything to do to a fan Rudder.
But I got him such a legal ground that he couldn't
refuse but write me eventually. and tell me that we
have the right to the tax. So we picked up that tax,
which in that day and time was a lot of money. When
you were, did you try to establish, well, let me see
if I can phrase this right. It seems as though in
your administration that the city, decided that
there was a need for parkland. Is that a correct
statement? Oh, yeah, it is. The council, we all
agreed that we needed more parkland. And it was a
matter of how we could get it. We had no people of
wealth in our community. Like in Bryan, there were
some people of wealth in years gone past, you know,
that could donate land. but nothing like that in
college and most of them worked for the university
retired from the university so we needed more
parkland to be sure but how do we get it and this idea
of getting it through the real estate people or the
developers it wasn't new because other cities had
been doing it So we decided to approach this angle
to get some of this parking. And we really didn't
have too much money to go out and, you know, go out
and buy it. Now we did do some investigating with
the possibility of getting some federal funds, at
least I did, because I had some Salt Conservation
people and others come in to look over different
tracks with this in mind. But nothing developed.
Our heart was in it, but we never got around to doing
it. Of course, I forget now the time and the events
and the plays
and things like this. Was Boyette against this
developer dedication? I think this came after
him. Yeah, I know it did. It came after
him. Yeah, we were interested in parks because,
see, they went with me, for example, on the Lincoln
Center. Reluctantly. But they didn't. At
that time, of course, we had, what, three centers
of Negro activity. Now we only have maybe two, and
they really don't amount to much anymore. But, you
know, we used to have a larger population.
Oh, really? How did the change to change to the
council at large voting council council members
at large come about instead of the lord's
system well we figured at a time that we'd have a
more representative
government if everyone had an opportunity for
everybody that went on the council We've got to
consider that the wards, the early wards at least,
were such that, like I said, we'd have maybe 15 or 20
people vote in one ward and 160 vote in another. and
there was no equity when they got to the council
table. The one that had represented 20 people had
as much, only as much authority, and the one
representing six times as much only had the same
voting purpose. So we, you know, was kicking
around the idea that it might be better to have
voting at large
and to You know, everybody then would have a chance
to, you know, name who they wanted the city
council. And this is done, or had been done, in some
areas. Subsequently, if I recall, the Supreme
Court came along and said that this was Oh, we don't
have it today? I don't think so. I don't know of a
Texas city that... What is ours considered a place
system? Yeah, place. You decide what place you...
It's not necessarily where you live. It's just...
Is that right? Yeah, that's right. And everybody
can vote for you for that place? For that place,
yeah. But I... In the essential, I'm the same
thing.
I don't know. I haven't heard any comments of late
about our system. But I know in the early days, you
know, that it just went one way and then the other.
And the days before, boy, yeah, you know, that was a
problem. When he would be elected from Ward 3 with
only a handful of votes, don't you mean? Yeah,
well, I know one of them went in with 12 votes. Oh,
really? Yeah, for the council. And I went in here
with about 120 votes. And somebody over in the
south side would go in and say it was 210. And he
couldn't have as much to say with 12 volts. And, you
know, the two of us combined had, what, 40 times
more than he did. So,
you know, it caused people to sit up and take
notice. And, well, it just went one way then the
other. Were you, were you one of the people who
pushed for the change? Oh yeah, when I had a lot of
this inequity, yeah. And then particularly with
Boyette, and then my inability to get anything
done. I wanted something done, we had to move.
That's just like even cooperating with the
university, putting lights on the west side of the
campus. Remember that, the little lights? We
contributed a very nominal amount to help with the
university and the student body. And even when
they dragged me in the court down here, that came up
by the opposing attorney. Did you not spend city
money? Spent city money in helping the
university?
I think this sign might be coming to a close. Let's
see.